In this concept, we will talk and learn about Arrays in Solidity.
There are mainly two types of arrays: static arrays and dynamic arrays.
The syntax for static arrays goes like this.
So, you have type of array followed by
size of array in square brackets and then the name of the array.
If the size is left empty inside the square brackets,
then you end up creating a dynamic array.
Static array means to create an array of fixed size.
Dynamic arrays don't have a fixed size.
So, on your screen right now,
let's look at the static array section, bool[10] array.
Create a static array with the name array that can hold 10 elements.
We can access individual elements like array element at index four.
In the dynamic array section,
we can create dynamic array with no size inside the square brackets.
In both static and dynamic arrays,
we can get the length of the array using the.length operator.
For static arrays, we cannot change the length property,
but for dynamic arrays, we can,
only if they were stored in storage.
Arrays behave quite differently in memory versus storage.
Let's talk about creating an array,
and which is again dynamic versus static array,
so I am going to look at both.
Let's look at the static arrays section again.
Now, we're trying to create a bool static array and then a uint static array.
For dynamic arrays, let's consider both;
storage and memory arrays.
For both storage and memory dynamic arrays,
we can allocate memory using the new keyword.
So, you can create an array and then you can allocate memory using the new operator.
You can push on dynamic storage arrays.
You can specifically use the keyword memory to create an array in memory.
For dynamic memory arrays,
you cannot use the push method.
This is a very, very important piece of information,
and I really want you to remember it.
So, again, you cannot push on dynamic memory arrays.
Let's talk about initialization arrays.
So, how do we initialize arrays?
In the first example,
we're declaring it as a uint8 static array,
and then also initializing it with uint values,
so the compiler will be fine with this.
In the second example,
the declared array type is int,
and the initialized type is uint,
so the compiler is going to throw an error.
In the third example,
we just need to apply explicit conversion to one element of the initialization data,
and the compiler will now be fine with this.
Let's take my array as an example here,
the one that you see on the screen.
So, we cannot initialize dynamic arrays in memory.
The reason is that the compiler implicitly creates
a static array which is not compatible with dynamic arrays in memory.
So, just remember, you cannot initialize
dynamic memories array in memory just like this. It's going to give you an error.
Now, let's look at some more examples here.
In the first line of code,
this is going to give us a compiler error.
Why? I just explained that to you in a couple slides before.
Since dynamic memory arrays cannot be initialized like this,
like we saw in just a couple of slides back.
In the second line of code,
we are creating a memory dynamic array and
then the third line of code we are trying to push on it.
This is also going to fail.
Again, can you answer why?
Since we cannot push memory arrays and again,
I explained that to you just a couple of slides back.
Moving up, let's look at some more examples for arrays.
In the very first example,
we are creating and also initializing the array at the same time.
The first line of code will compile without errors.
Since we are creating a static array of
three elements and then we're initializing it with two elements,
the last element is initialized to zero.
In the second example,
we're creating a static array to hold
three elements but we're trying to store four elements.
This is going to give us a compile error,
since it cannot hold four elements.
Let us summarize arrays.
Some very important points of arrays you really need to remember.
First of all, solidity supports dynamic arrays and static arrays code.
There is a difference in how memory and storage arrays are treated.
The first one is that you cannot push on memory arrays.
So, remember, you cannot push on memory arrays.
Next one, you cannot change the length of static arrays.
Next one, you cannot initialize dynamic memory arrays like the 1,
2, 3 assignment on your screen.
So, again, for dynamic memory arrays,
you cannot have initialization like this one.
Now, let's look at a sample contract to
understand and look at all these things that we've just talked about.
Okay. So, on this sample contract that we have in front of you.
Again, I'm going to recap pragma solidity,
the name of the version,
then the contract word.
A very simple view of creating a contract,
we're using Remix for all these sample contracts for now.
We are going to be giving you code,
so you can actually copy and paste this code in your Remix editor and play around,
change values, and really learn all these topics nice and well.
Okay, so let's start.
So, we have created three types of arrays here.
The first one is a static array but size three of type int,
and we're also initializing at the same time.
So, we're giving it two values,
that means the last element is automatically going to set it to zero,
and then we're having a dynamic array of type int8.
No number in the brackets,
that means it's a dynamic array.
The next we're creating a bool dynamic array,
the name is dynamicBoolArray.
Now, we have a function,
and the function's name is testArray.
Now, in the function,
what we're doing is that we're actually allocating memory.
We just created an array here.
If you see, we have a dynamic bool array.
Now, we're actually allocating memory and this is how you do it.
So, you create an array, a dynamic array,
and then you allocate memory for int elements with this statement here.
Now, in the next statement, what we're trying to do,
we are doing an explicit conversion as needed,
for sure, just because you have to convert from uint8 to int8.
So, if you see I'm trying to convert from uint8 to int8,
since the dynamic int array is of type int.
So, I'm going to convert my 1, 2,
3 numbers which are uint to int to do this.
So, this is perfectly going to be fine.
The second line is also going to work fine,
right here the uint8 memory memoryArray.
You can definitely create memory arrays like this;
you cannot do it outside functions.
Outside functions arrays are definitely,
by default, are going to be stored in storage.
If you put a memory word,
the compiler is going to complain about that.
But inside functions, you can do storage or you can actually, forcefully,
just put the word memory so that you want to make sure that
this array is in memory. So, that worked fine.
Now, we just talked about that,
you cannot do this kind of assignment for dynamic memory arrays.
So, assignment of dynamic memory arrays is not allowed.
If I uncomment this,
you will see the compiler gives an error.
So, this kind of assignment for dynamic memory arrays does not work.
Again, we're allocating memory for
the memory array that we just created here for the new operator.
Now, we also saw a couple of other things that we cannot push on memory arrays like this.
So, if I uncomment this I'm going to get an error.
We also cannot get the.length for memory arrays like this,
even that gives us an error.
Now, for static arrays,
we can do this kind of an initialization.
So, if you see this kind of initialization
for dynamic memory array was giving us an error,
but for static array, it's perfectly fine.
So, we're initializing the array with 1,
2, 3 elements, it works fine.
Then, we're creating another memory static array,
memory word static because it has a number in the bracket.
Memory, because we're putting the word forcefully memory because we're inside a function.
Now, this assignment is allowed because it is
a static memory array but if it was
a dynamic memory array like we saw is going to give an error.
So, this is going to work fine.
Again, we're doing an explicit conversion to store in the static memory array.
Now, what again is allowed.
You can always store individual elements,
those are perfectly fine.
So, you can access individual elements and store a value.
So, this works fine for static memory arrays and also dynamic memory arrays.
Now, these are some of the things I definitely wanted you to focus and learn.
The really important one is that you cannot push a memory array.
So, this is a very important one.
You cannot initialize dynamic memory arrays this way.
So, these are a couple of really important points that I really want you to remember,
and I would definitely encourage you to watch this video again.
Because, a couple of times you watch it,
the concepts will definitely get clearer.
So, I want you to copy this code,
bring it into your Remix, play around,
change values, and really try to get the concepts nice and clear in your head.